---
title: Glossary of Poker Terms
tags: [poker]
image: placeholder.jpg
---

This is a glossary of common poker terms. Suggest additions or changes in the comments below.

<nav class="inline">[#](#num) [A](#a) [B](#b) [C](#c) [D](#d) [E](#e) [F](#f) [G](#g) [H](#h) [I](#i) [J](#j) [K](#k) [L](#l) [M](#m) [N](#n) [O](#o) [P](#p) [Q](#q) [R](#r) [S](#s) [T](#t) [U](#u) [V](#v) [W](#w) [X](#x) [Y](#y) [Z](#z)</nav>#### #

- <span class="term">$1/$2, $5/$10, $10/$20</span> A way of notating the size of the blinds in the stakes being played. $10/$20 means a $10 small blind, and a $20 big blind. In this book, it generally refers to no-limit stakes, so a normal buyin for a $10/$20 game is 100 big blinds, or $2000.
- <span class="term">3-bet</span> To reraise; a raise over a raise. (The initial bet on any street is a 1-bet, the raise a 2-bet, but those terms are not used. Preflop, the big blind is considered the initial bet, so the first raise is a 2-bet.)
- <span class="term">4-bet</span> To reraise a reraise; to raise a 3-bet.

#### A

- <span class="term">Air</span> Cards that completely missed the board; a nothing hand.

#### B

- <span class="term">Backdoor</span> To hit a hand using the turn and river cards, and only one or no flop cards. Generally considered to be a sneaky (or lucky) hand to hit. Synonymous with &ldquo;runner runner.&rdquo;
- <span class="term">Bad Beat</span> To initially have a stronger hand than your opponent, but have your opponent get lucky and improve his hand, causing you to lose.
- <span class="term">Balance</span> Having different kinds of hands (such as strong and weak) in your range to &ldquo;balance&rdquo; it out.
- <span class="term">Baller</span> Slang for someone with a lot of money, or someone very successful. Derives from footballer or basketballer.
- <span class="term">Bankroll</span> The amount of money you have allocated for playing poker. Also known as your &ldquo;roll.&rdquo;
- <span class="term">Barrel</span> To bet continually postflop.
- <span class="term">Bb (big blind)</span> The minimum possible bet in a no-limit or pot-limit game. Also refers to the player at the table who's in the position of having to pay the big blind preflop (considered the worst position at the table).
- <span class="term">Betting Pattern</span> The sequence of bets that a player makes during a hand, or habits that a player has in how he bets certain hands. A player with a transparent betting pattern will implicitly reveal how strong he is during a hand.
- <span class="term">Bink</span> To get lucky and hit something.
- <span class="term">Blank</span> A card that doesn't change the board significantly. Usually a low card, but not always.
- <span class="term">Bluffcatcher</span> A hand that is strong enough to beat a bluff, but is not itself a strong hand. If the preflop raiser bet every street on A♣K<span class="red">♦</span>9<span class="red">♥</span> T<span class="red">♥</span>2♠, and you called him down with K<span class="red">♦</span>Q<span class="red">♥</span>, that would be a bluffcatcher.
- <span class="term">Board</span> The totality of the community cards. We say the board &ldquo;changes&rdquo; if the addition of a new community card dramatically affects hand values.
- <span class="term">Board Texture</span> The way the arrangement of community cards interact with each other. A board like 9♣4<span class="red">♥</span>2♠ would be a considered to have a &ldquo;dry&rdquo; texture, because the cards don't really interact with each other, and there are few draws or strong hands that connect with it. On the other hand, a board like J♠ 9♠ 8<span class="red">♥</span>would have a very &ldquo;drawy&rdquo; texture.
- <span class="term">Bumhunter</span> Someone who only waits around for very fishy players, and refuses to play anyone else. Generally a pejorative in poker culture.
- <span class="term">Button</span> The person with the dealer chip. This is the last player before the blinds, and the player with the best position.
- <span class="term">Buyin</span> The amount of money one brings initially to the table. It's also used as a measure of big blinds&mdash;one buyin is considered 100 big blinds, since that's the standard buyin for a no-limit game. (You can technically buy in for many different amounts though. In most games, there is a cap on how much you can buy in for, which varies depending on the structure and size of the game.)

#### C

- <span class="term">C-bet (continuation bet)</span> To follow up a preflop raise with a bet on the flop, regardless of how the board connects with one's hand. It's called a continuation bet because it's essentially a &ldquo;continuation&rdquo; of earlier aggression, exploiting the power of taking initiative.
- <span class="term">Calling Station</span> Someone who calls a lot. Generally a pejorative.
- <span class="term">Call Down</span> To keep calling someone's bets.
- <span class="term">Call Time</span> In online poker, to go into one's time bank for extra time to think about a decision.
- <span class="term">Check Back</span> To check after you've been checked to.
- <span class="term">Check Down</span> To check all the way to showdown.
- <span class="term">Checkraise</span> To first check, and then raise over a bet.
- <span class="term">Cold 4-Bet</span> To make your first raise be a 4-bet over someone's 3-bet. Basically, if some other player raises, and someone else reraises him, and you reraise that person as your very first bet, that's called a cold 4-bet.
- <span class="term">Connect</span> For a hand to interact positively with the board in some way. Your hand connects with the board usually if you've made a pair or a draw.

#### D

- <span class="term">Deepstacked</span> Playing with generally 200 big blinds or more at a table.
- <span class="term">Donk</span> Donk can be either a noun or a verb: as a noun, it's slang for a donkey, or a bad player. As a verb, to donk can mean to lead out into the preflop raiser before he gets a chance to bet, or in a phrase such as &ldquo;donk around,&rdquo; it can mean to act stupidly.
- <span class="term">Donkey</span> A bad or stupid player. Pejorative.
- <span class="term">Downswing</span> An extended losing streak.
- <span class="term">Draw</span> A draw (or drawing hand) is a hand that is not yet complete, and needs another card in order to become a strong hand. Four cards of one suit (drawing to a flush) and four consecutive cards (drawing to a straight) are the most common.
- <span class="term">Drawy</span> A drawy board is one on which drawing hands are likely, or with which many good starting hands will connect with draws. J♠ 9♠ 8<span class="red">♥</span>is an example of a board with a very drawy texture.
- <span class="term">Dry</span> A dry board is a disconnected, unsuited board, with which most starting hands won't connect or make draws. A board like 9♣4<span class="red">♥</span>2♠ is an example of a dry board.

#### E

- <span class="term">Early Street</span> The earlier betting rounds in a poker hand. This typically refers to preflop and the flop.
- <span class="term">Equity</span> Your hand's percentage likelihood of winning the pot. For example, if you have AA against QQ all-in preflop, you have about 80% equity.
- <span class="term">EV</span> Expected value; this refers to how much money you should win or lose *on average* for a given decision. EV is a statistical concept&mdash;in a sense, it's what you &ldquo;should be making&rdquo; for any given play.
- <span class="term">Exploitation</span> Taking advantage of weaknesses in an opponent's game. For example, if someone is bluffing too much, you can exploit them by calling more bluffcatchers; if someone is bluffing too little, you can exploit them by never bluffcatching.

#### F

- <span class="term">Flatcall</span> To call.
- <span class="term">Flatting</span> Also means to call. Short for flatcalling.
- <span class="term">Float</span> To call a bet with air, usually intending to take away the pot on a later street by betting or raising. Tricky players will float often.
- <span class="term">Flop</span> The flop consists of the first three community cards. &ldquo;The flop&rdquo; can refer to either the community cards, or to the round of betting which occurs once the first three community cards are dealt.
- <span class="term">Flopping a Hand</span> To immediately make a strong hand using the first three community cards&mdash;the flop.
- <span class="term">Fold</span> To throw away your hand against a bet.
- <span class="term">FPS</span> Fancy Play Syndrome. Poker slang for being too elaborate or fanciful in one's play, where a simpler decision would've been better.
- <span class="term">Frontbet</span> To bet into the preflop raiser.

#### G

- <span class="term">Game Flow</span> The pattern of decisions and emotions that occur over time between two people. Game flow is very intuitive and highly complex, and so can often not be communicated adequately unless one sees all of the hands that contribute to it.
- <span class="term">Grinding</span> To play poker, usually in a slow and steady fashion.
- <span class="term">Gutshot</span> A straight draw that can be completed with only one card. For example, having 9♣T<span class="red">♦</span> on 2<span class="red">♥</span>6♠7♣, where only an 8 can make a straight.

#### H

- <span class="term">Heads-up</span> One-on-one.
- <span class="term">Hero</span> A term used for a protagonist in a poker hand, largely for the purpose of anonymity. Usually refers to the person recounting the hand. His chief opponent is usually termed the &ldquo;villain.&rdquo;
- <span class="term">Hero-call</span> To call with a bluffcatcher, usually for a lot of money.
- <span class="term">High card</span> A high card generally refers to a T, J, Q, K, or A. &ldquo;High card&rdquo; is also the name for the weakest possible hand&mdash;for example, if you have K♣T<span class="red">♦</span> on J<span class="red">♥</span>Q♣4<span class="red">♦</span>5♠2♣, this hand would be called &ldquo;high card king&rdquo; or &ldquo;king high.&rdquo;
- <span class="term">Hitting a Hand</span> To make one's hand.
- <span class="term">Hole Cards</span> The (two) cards you are dealt.
- <span class="term">HUD</span> Heads Up Display. Refers to a program that displays stats or information real-time over your poker tables.

#### I

- <span class="term">Implied odds</span> Your pot odds, but adjusted for expected future bets. To rely on implied odds generally means you're inferring that when you make a strong hand, you'll get paid off.

#### K

- <span class="term">Kicker</span> Your side card; a kicker is not used to make your hand, but is used in tie-breakers between hands of the same type. For example, if you have A♣T<span class="red">♦</span> on A<span class="red">♥</span>5♣4<span class="red">♦</span>9<span class="red">♥</span>2<span class="red">♥</span>, you have a pair of aces with a ten kicker. If your opponent had A♠7♠, you would win the pot.

#### L

- <span class="term">Lead</span> To bet out into the raiser (or previous aggressor).

#### M

- <span class="term">Made Hand</span> A completed hand.
- <span class="term">Martingaling</span> A strategy of continually doubling your bets every time you lose. For example, you might play a $20 match and lose, then play a $40 match and lose, then an $80 match and lose, until eventually you manage to get even. Most associated with tilting.
- <span class="term">Metagame</span> The higher level of strategy in poker, which is played above the momentary strategy constrained by individual hands. Metagame is generally only meaningful if you are playing many hands with another person.
- <span class="term">Minbet</span> To bet the minimum possible amount&mdash;in a no-limit Hold'em game, one big blind.
- <span class="term">Minraise</span> To raise the minimum possible amount&mdash;in a no-limit Hold'em game, at least twice the initial bet.
- <span class="term">Monster Hand</span> A very strong hand. Can refer to two pair or better.
- <span class="term">Muck</span> To fold your hand and not show your cards.

#### N

- <span class="term">Nitreg</span> A tight, boring regular.
- <span class="term">Nitty</span> Tight and boring.
- <span class="term">NL</span> Abbreviation for no-limit.
- <span class="term">NLHE</span> Abbreviation for No Limit Hold'em.
- <span class="term">No-limit</span> Means there is no maximum on the amount of money that can be bet on any street.
- <span class="term">Nuts</span> The best possible hand on a given board.

#### O

- <span class="term">o</span> Short for off-suit in hand notation, such as AKo referring to A♣K<span class="red">♥</span>.
- <span class="term">OESD</span> Open-Ended Straight Draw. Refers to a straight draw that can be completed with two cards. An example of an open-ended straight draw would be 9♣T<span class="red">♦</span> on 8<span class="red">♥</span>7♣3<span class="red">♦</span>, which can make a straight with either a J or a 6.
- <span class="term">Offsuit</span> Cards of different suits.
- <span class="term">Outs</span> Cards that will make a drawing hand into a made hand. If a card will &ldquo;complete&rdquo; a draw, then it's an out.
- <span class="term">Overbet</span> To bet more than the size of the pot.
- <span class="term">Overcard</span> A card that is higher than any card on the board.
- <span class="term">Overpair</span> A pair that is higher than any card on the board. Having an overpair implies that you have been dealt a pocket pair preflop.

#### P

- <span class="term">Playing Fast</span> To play a hand fast means to play it aggressively and straightforwardly, usually betting every street. It's the opposite of slowplaying.
- <span class="term">PLO</span> Pot-Limit Omaha, a game like Hold'em except it is played with four hole cards instead of two.
- <span class="term">Preflop</span> The first round of betting, which occurs before the flop is dealt.
- <span class="term">Pocket [hand]</span> Having a pair dealt to you preflop. For example, 9♣9<span class="red">♦</span> would be known as &ldquo;pocket nines.&rdquo;
- <span class="term">Postflop</span> The rounds of betting that occur after the flop&mdash;that is, the turn and river, which are generally considered the most tricky streets.
- <span class="term">Pot (verb)</span> To bet the size of the pot.
- <span class="term">Pot-limit</span> A variant of poker in which you can only bet up to the size of the pot, and no bigger.
- <span class="term">Pot odds</span> The ratio of the current size of the pot to the cost of calling a bet. By comparing your pot odds to the probability of winning the hand, you can calculate the EV of a call.

#### R

- <span class="term">r</span> Stands for &ldquo;rainbow&rdquo; in poker notation, such as in J94r.
- <span class="term">Rag</span> A low card, usually a 7 or less. Often used in conjunction with the bigger card, as in &ldquo;ace-rag&rdquo; to refer to an ace with a smallish side card.
- <span class="term">Rainbow</span> A board that has all different suits; implies that no flush draws are immediately possible. Called a rainbow because it contains every color.
- <span class="term">Range</span> The set of all possible hands that someone can have in a situation. We might say someone has a &ldquo;wide&rdquo; range, meaning he likely will have lots of different kinds of hands there, or that he has a &ldquo;narrow&rdquo; or &ldquo;tight&rdquo; range, meaning he'll be playing very few hands in that way.
- <span class="term">Regular</span> Someone who regularly plays certain stakes or in a certain game.
- <span class="term">Rep</span> Slang for &ldquo;represent.&rdquo;
- <span class="term">Represent</span> To represent a hand is to bet in a way that is consistent with having that hand. Often implies that one does not actually possess the hand one is representing.
- <span class="term">Reverse Implied Odds</span> A situation in which when you make a big hand, you are only likely to lose more money, because your opponent will already have a better one. The antithesis of implied odds.
- <span class="term">River</span> The last community card. Also refers to the final round of betting, which occurs after the last community card is dealt.
- <span class="term">Rivered</span> To &ldquo;river&rdquo; something means simply that a certain card was dealt or a hand was made on the river. You might river an ace, or river your straight. To &ldquo;get rivered&rdquo; generally means to get sucked out on the river by your opponent.
- <span class="term">Roll</span> Slang for bankroll. Refers to the amount of money a player has allocated for poker.
- <span class="term">Run-out</span> The run-out simply refers to how the board turned out. Often specifically means what cards were dealt after the money went all-in.
- <span class="term">Runner Runner</span> When the turn card and river card both contribute to make a strong hand. For example, 9♣T<span class="red">♦</span> on K<span class="red">♥</span>3<span class="red">♦</span>7♣8<span class="red">♥</span>6♣ would be a runner-runner straight (also known as a backdoor straight).

#### S

- <span class="term">s</span> Short for &ldquo;suited&rdquo; in hand notation, such as 78s.
- <span class="term">Second Nuts</span> The second best possible hand on a board.
- <span class="term">Semibluff</span> To bluff with a hand that has some equity in the pot, with cards left to be dealt. Usually refers to betting aggressively while you have a draw.
- <span class="term">Set</span> Being dealt a pocket pair and making three of a kind, using both of your hole cards. Considered an extremely strong hand.
- <span class="term">Setmine</span> Setmining is the simple strategy of calling many pocket pairs preflop to raises, hoping to hit sets and get paid off. Setmining is generally considered a very tight and simplistic strategy.
- <span class="term">Shove</span> To go all-in.
- <span class="term">Show Down (verb)</span> To show the hands at the end of the final round of poker and award the pot to the winner.
- <span class="term">Slowplay</span> To initially play a hand passively or slowly, hoping to deceive your opponent into thinking you're weak when in fact you are strong.
- <span class="term">Snapcall</span> To call instantly.
- <span class="term">Soulread</span> To predict someone's gameplay perfectly; to &ldquo;read their soul.&rdquo;
- <span class="term">Speed Read</span> A read on someone's tells with regards to how long they take with different kinds of hands.
- <span class="term">Splash Around</span> To play liberally and make lots of risky or foolish plays.
- <span class="term">Spot</span> A situation.
- <span class="term">Street</span> A betting round.
- <span class="term">Suckout</span> To initially have a worse hand than one's opponent, but then improve to be better than theirs.
- <span class="term">Suited</span> Being of the same suit (diamonds, hearts, clubs, or spades).
- <span class="term">Sweat</span> To watch someone else play poker, sometimes while advising them.

#### T

- <span class="term">Tank</span> To think for a long time.
- <span class="term">Tankfold</span> To think for a long time and then fold.
- <span class="term">Tilt</span> To let your emotions affect your play or decision-making.
- <span class="term">Tiltmonkey</span> Someone who tilts wildly or stupidly.
- <span class="term">Top Pair</span> The highest possible pair that connects with the board.
- <span class="term">Trips</span> Three of a kind. Generally refers only to when a pair is on the board and the third card is a hole card.
- <span class="term">Turn</span> The fourth community card. Also refers to the round of betting that occurs after the fourth community card is dealt. A hand or card can be &ldquo;turned,&rdquo; which simply means it appears or is made once the fourth community card is dealt.

#### U

- <span class="term">Upswing</span> An uptick in one's money or buyins.

#### V

- <span class="term">Value</span> Value generally refers to the betting strategy of betting to increase the pot size and entice others to call, because you have a strong hand. When you have a big hand, you need to &ldquo;maximize value,&rdquo; which basically means making as much money as possible.
- <span class="term">Value Hand</span> A hand that is strong enough to bet for value.
- <span class="term">Valuebet</span> A bet for value. Usually means you have the best hand. The polar opposite of a bluff.
- <span class="term">Variance</span> The natural fluctuations in winnings as a result of randomness and luck.
- <span class="term">Villain</span> A term used for your opponent in a recounted hand. Its purpose is to anonymize the actual opponent.

#### W

- <span class="term">Winrate</span> The rate at which one is winning.
- <span class="term">Wired [hand]</span> Another word for a pocket pair. For example, 8♣8<span class="red">♥</span>would be wired eights.
